Built my first major project, It is my longest running project.

After learning complete html, css and js, I built a web based UI builder / Visual Editor from scratch (DOM manipulator Engine). As I had no knowledge about pre built libraries or frameworks the core builder is itself is not dependent on any libraries or framework. However the platform itself utilizes express js, mongoose etc for cloud saving.

-> It's a zero dependency builder, which doesn't depends on any pre-existing libraries like react or grape.js to function.
-> It's core builder logic is written in vanilla js and UI is made using HTML and vanilla css.

[CORE BUILDER ARCHITECHURE]:

-> When the builder is initialized by the user, It injects a iframe (with it's own DOM) inside the builder UI, which acts as virtual browser environment for the preview of the project.

-> After complete iframe initialization and global variables like reference to state_object, project DOM root, DOM, project stylesheet are intiallized, fluence loads a object called project_state. The entire project's DOM is saved inside the project_state, project_state acts as a hierarchial JSON based tree (a virtual DOM). Every element and it's properties are saved with their unique key generated by the builder in the project_state and also has it's relation defined in the tree. The objective of project_state is to mantain an structure of the project which can saved and retrieved anytime.

-> The tree nature of the project_state object enables it to be traversed by the builder as a multiway tree as well as the unique key for every single element spawned enables O(1) time retrieval of any element and it's property (bypassing computationaly heavy tree traversals). 

-> project_state is then travesed by a global project rendering function, the core objective of this function is to traverse through each and every element inside project_state as a tree travelsal and inject them in the real DOM of the project (iframe's DOM). So that the project can displayed on the iframe in real time.

		[virtual DOM (project_state) ---> Real DOM (html, css)]

-> Apart from global project rendering function, an user event triggered function is also in the builder, It is a element rendering function whose main objective is to read user input (element which user wants to spawn) pick up the json based virtual DOM snippet of that type of element from a object which contains the builder's general recipe to spawn each type of element and traverse that recipe tree to render that element on the project's DOM, create an unique ID for that spawned element, prepare a virtual json based DOM object which contains all the specifications and relational structure of spawned element, store the virtual DOM object in project_state as key value pair with unique as the key.

-> Fluence mantains a index map object, which maps all the project's DOM element to their respective objects in project_state, the element's object in project_state too contains an reference to it's DOM element forming a bi-directional tracking system, so that the user can change specifications of an element at extreme low latency.

-> Fluence has a single central focus system, an user can select an element or a css selector targeting elements on iframe directly and the central focus system updates the focus pointer, updates all the sub tabs like css tab, attributes tab etc with the values of currently focused element.

-> Fluence utilizes 6 different functions 3 for handling change in attributes, 3 for change in styles (css), one reads the input from the user on the input fields on the respective tabs and applies the changes directly to the rendered element on project's DOM as well as in the project_state. one function is for syncing the values from project_state to the input tabs and one is for individual element syncing.

-> The type of input format fluence takes from the user in specifications tab is completely different from the values that are actually applied on the element itself, (ex: user provides value and unit differently for a css property but on element they are applied as a combined string and many more exceptions), to handle this fluence utilizes multiple string decoders to format or fetch values from the input provided by the user and also for displaying values from project_state to the specifications tab, so that they can be applied on the element without errors.

      [specifications_tab -> input_reader() -> string_decoder()-> final_applicable_value -> project_state]

      [specifications_tab <- final_displayable_value <- string_decoder() <- specifications_reader() <- project_state]

-> The input reader is itself dependent on the builder UI's input field dataset attributes to identify respective operations as well as string decoders for the given input.

->On a successfull specification change, an autosave function equipped with debounce is invoked to store the updated project_state on the database.

-> Fluence has built-in clipboard operations (like cut, copy, paste, duplicate etc). The clipboard system in Fluence bypasses the native operating system clipboard and the browser's navigator.clipboard API entirely. Instead of copying raw HTML strings, it executes deep clones of virtual DOM json state tree inside a globally scoped JavaScript variable (the clipboard) used to stored copied tree/subtrees.
	
	Clipboard Operations:
	
	1) Copy(): Function takes a DOM element as argument, retrieves it's unique ID in map to fetch it's object in project_state. The 	  	object along with it's whole subtree (descendants) object is traversed by the function to create a deep clone of the 		object stored in the global clipboard.

	2) Paste(): It takes existing (if any) deep cloned object from the global clipboard object and stores it in the project_state 		with a new generated unique ID, updates the hierarchy relation wires and finally invokes the global render function on 		the root node of the deep cloned object to create the live DOM version of the deep cloned object.

	3) Cut(): It is a synchronous wrapper function which firstly invokes copy() in order to save a deep clone target element object 		in the global clipboard, then deletes the target element (live DOM version as well as from the project_state object) 		removing it entirely from the json state tree.

	4) Duplicate(): It basically automates the rapid copy paste cycle, it invokes copy() on the target element provided as argument
			and then invokes paste() at the parent element of the target element as the destination container.

	! All the clipboard operations are only invoked after flushing any pre-existing data in the global clipboard variable in order 	to prevent conflicts.


-> Fluence has a element deletion mechanism which deletes the target element and it's descendants from the project_state as well as from the project's DOM, followed by removal of any references stored in index maps and lastly it invokes withdraw_focus to remove the last reference to the deleted element. This delete() function basically traverses to the absolute leaf node of the target element object and then deletes all the descendant nodes from bottom to top during backtracking including the root node.

-> Fluence has a separate mechanism to handle stylesheet based directives like creation and modification of animations in the project or the css selector system:
	
	Animation Controller:
	
	1) All the animations ever declared by the user throughout the project are stored inside the global directives object. Every 	animation object contains the data about each and every timeline mapped to their respective objects containing the css 	properties applied in the animation at the specific timeline.

	2) When a animation_creator() in invoked, It prompts from animation name and generates a animation object and sends a POST 	request on backend to store the newly created animation object, On a successfull save, it then stores the animation object in 
	global directives object, and updates the animation list, it generates a boiler plate animation rule string with animation name 	and injects it in project's CSSOM, the CSSOM index of the animation rule is saved inside the animation object, Lastly it 	invokes the fluence's built-in animation editor mechanism on newly created animation.

	3) The builder isolates the editing process to prevent mutating the actual project layout while designing keyframes. It first 	creates a deep clone of animation object to be edited so that it can be restored to the previous state if incase user aborts 	the editing process.

	4) It launches a dedicated iframe for the editor preview, hiding the main project's viewport, It spawns a dummy element inside 	the editor iframe to serve as a visual preview to user editing an animation.
	
	5) Fluence edits animations in the form of classic % based animation timelines, the editor's UI serves as a timeline adjuster 	and a keyframe generator (just like a video editor), user can slide the timeline slider to any % of timeline and create or 	delete keyframes at that point.	

	6) Every keyframe generated by the user creates a object inside the animation object residing inside directives object. Every 	keyframe is mapped to an empty object.

	7) When the user manipulates the styles of the dummy element, the editor stores all the modified styles and their values inside 	the object mapped to that specific keyframe inside animation object.

	8) Editor also mantains the whole animation timeline inside a custom made doubly Linked List simulated inside a array of length 	101 (0% to 100%), Basically every keyframe object created inside animation object also has a reference in the array at the 	specifically same index at which the keyframe is created, every keyframe object has reference to it's next immediate next and 	previous keyframe object, and any new keyframe is added using linked list insertion algorithms and vice-versa for deletion.

	9) Whenever the user sets the timeline slider at any specific timeline of the animation, the editor traverses the array bi-	directionally from that index to find the nearest node of the doubly Linked List, Once the node is found editor uses basic 	Linked List traversal to traverse it bi-directionally and prepares a object containing all the styles and their values at 	specific timeframe, Lastly all those styles are applied to the dummy element and it's serves as a visual preview to the user.

	10) Once user completes the editing and invokes saving mechanism, the editor then traverse the whole linked list from head to 	tail and converts all the keyframe objects into a CSSOM supported css rule string, the builder then locates the old rule in 	CSSOM using the rule index stored in animation object, deletes the old rule and appends the new rule, updates the rule index in 	animation object. Lastly the editor instance is destroyed along with the backup of old animation object.
	
	
	Selector Controller:
	
	1) The selector system in Fluence shifts the engine from generating simple inline styles to declaring and managing global CSS 	rules. It allows users to target elements by class, ID, tag, or attribute, and enforces standard CSS cascading rules.

	2) When Selector manager is initialized, user can either write the whole css selector or can use inbuilt selector formatter to 	create complex selectors, the builder calculates the real time relative specificity of the selector, two string decoders 	constantly converts inputs as string to as formatters and vice-versa. Once the selector is saved, it is stored in a local array 	called selector_order which contains the references to all the selector objects, this array is sorted according to the 	specificity of the selectors means selector with highest specificity will be stored at index with highest magnitude, Lastly 	the selector rule string is injected in CSSOM and rule index is stored in respective selector object.

	3) Fluence also keeps the track of all the elements targeted by individual selectors, to achieve this the builder mantains a 	map with has the element's unique ID as key which is mapped to a set of all the selector indexes which are targeting that 	element.
	
	4) When a element specifications or selector's specification is modified, the builder again rebuilds the object which maps 	elements to their respective selectors.

	5) Fluence uses context hijacking in order to enable users to edit css styles possessed by a selector, whenever a selector is 	selected by the user, the builder creates a dummy element and also injects the targeted selector object into the project_state 	with a hardcoded unique ID "element-1", Lastly it maps the dummy element to selector object in index maps and draws central 	focus on it, So that builder treats the selector itself as a DOM element.

	6) Now user can edit css styles of a css selector by using pre-existing element style editing architecture (listeners, string 	decoders, updater functions etc).

-> Fluence provides a viewport resizing mechanism, which enables users to see the overview of their UI on the display of any size regardless the size of their physical device's display. it mathematically manipulates the dimensions of preview iframe and editor iframe using CSS transforms and cross-document event listeners. When a user sets a specific height, width and zoom of vieport inside the builder's preview container, the handler functions applies those physical height and width using inline styles and zoom using transforms scale. A extremely large vieport (like 4k, 8k) cannot physically fit on a smaller displays like(full HD, 2K), In order to solve it the builder provides automatic scalling mechanism, It basically calculates the scale(upscaling or downscaling) required to fit the viewport in the  preview window, this scale coefficient is calculated by max dimensions of window by actual dimensions of viewport, they are separately calculated for height and width, the maximum scale coefficient is considered and the preview container is scaled according to the coefficient using css transforms.

-> Fluence's free-drag mechanism is significantly more complex than standard drag-and-drop. Because users build responsive websites using relative units (%, vw, vh), a standard pixel-based drag system would destroy the responsive layout by overwriting percentages with hardcoded pixels. Builder generates a selector box on the central focused element as soon as it is selected by the user, the selector box contains 4 dots (left, right, top, bottom) and a move dot (all directions), these dots have attached listeners to them, a sync_selector() functions constantly adapts to it's element's dimensions and cords on invocation, when any dot is clicked by the user, the builder records the initial cords (distance from left edge and top edge) of the dot, current computed dimensions of the selected element + user defined dimensions in relative units and also two more listeners are attached to the document to listen drag and release, On drag the builder constantly calculates the displacement of mouse pointer from recorded dot in pixels and updates the dimension of the element continuously, once the mouse is released, the builder does a reverse conversion of dimension in pixel to the initial relative unit, Similarly for the move dot (only works if element's position property is not static, fixed), Once the user drags the element across screen, the builder constantly calculates the displacement of left and top edge of the element from the initial position and updates the left and top css property in pixels, once user releases the mouse the builder performs same mathematical operations to get relative units.

-> Fluence provides a global export mechanism, which basically converts the user project into a raw html file, On invocation, the builder fetches the raw inner HTML string of the entire project from project's DOM, iterates CSSOM rule array and fetches all the css rules in raw string, It inserts all the css rule strings in the style tag of the raw HTML, Finally converts the massive HTML string into a downloadable BLOB and prompts the user to download it.


[BACKEND (Terrible)]:

-> It is the most flawed part of this project, in order to save user's project_state on cloud, fluence has it's own backend logic.

-> Fluence utilizes a node js + express framework for backend for receiving http requests from the frontend.

-> Authentication: As I said I dont knew about industry standard libraries, the authentication is not industry standard itself, whenever the user registers or logins a account successfully, the backend generates a random string token and stores it in user document in mongodb and sends the same token to frontend in plain text, frontend then stores that token in localStorage leaving it vurnable to XSS attacks, every http request sent to the backend is sent with unique username and the auth token, after the intitiallization of every session the token is changed hence rendering old token useless.

-> The passwords are stored in plain string without any encryption in mongodb. 
	
-> It utitilizes the mongoose ODM to directly store user data in mongo db from application server also adding a extra validation layer to ensure consistency.

-> there are multiple routes and their respective routers to handle incoming requests.
	
	POST '/register' : Receives username, password, email of the user, ensures that username is unique, and creates the mongodb 	document in user data, generates auth token and sends back to the frontend.
		
	POST '/login' : Receives username, password, checks if the combination exists in user data collection and returns response 	accordingly with auth token if needed.

	POST '/project' : Every http request causing change in user projects has this endpoint as origin, It is handled by the project 	router, it has a router level middleware to check whether requests have valid auth token or not.
	
		1) '/project/save' : Receives project_state and project ID, updates the project_state in the user_data collection in 				    mongodb 
		
		2) '/project/initiallize' : Recieves project_name and creates a project object with a unique ID in user document.

		.....etc and many more.	

[Limitations of Builder]:

1) Users cant create single page UIs as of now. As it doesn't have frontend routing like react.

2) The major part of builder logic heavily depends on synchronous flow of js, may bloat main thread.

3) Doesnt provide any type of js manipulation mechanism, hence users can't dictate interactions with UI.

4) The builder code lacks modularity and independence among different mechanismns due to excessive use of global variables, hence very bad maintainability.

5) No way to add custom css or attributes as of now.

6) Builder's clipboard mechanism bypasses the browser's default clipboaord, hence prevents users from basic copy paste operations using shortcut keys.

7) Contains too much mechanisms from stratch, too much of reinventing the wheel.

8) No mechanism to write media queries.

9) No mechanism for css display:grid.


[Deployement]:

1) Fluence is deployed on AWS.

2) It utilizes a AWS free EC2 instance with ubuntu for VPS, in order to remain online 24/7.

3) Main script is executed using PM2 package to keep the application alive in background, preventing any downtime.

4) Nginx is used for reverse proxy, basically it redirects the incoming http requests (port 80) and https requests(443) to the port  reserved by the application.

5) Purchased domain "fluencebuilder.in" from hostinger.com and set it to the ip of the VPS.

6) After successful domain assign, I used certbot with nginx plugin to issue a SSL certificate on my domain, hence shifting it from http to https.

[Future Goals]:

1) To ensure a complete command on backend and learn industry standard practices to make things work in order to fix the backend of fluence.

2) Implement a Js manipulation mechanism, so that users can dictate user interaction with their UI's.

3) Implement a automatic deployement pipeline, so that users can host their web pages directly from the platform.

4) Shift to more modular logic writing practices.

5) Introduce a sub platform for fluence know as fluence community, so that users can share their designs with multiple users.
